---
title: 'Event Models: Understanding the Temporal and Spatial Dynamics'
date: 2024-04-14
permalink: /posts/2024/04/blog-post-15/
tags:
- Event Cognition 
- Experience Model 
---


**Event Models: Understanding the Temporal and Spatial Dynamics**

Event models, unlike system models, capture the entities and functional relationships involved in understanding a specific state of affairs. While system models concern the system's function and remain valid across various circumstances, event models are more dynamic.

There are two types of event models: one derived from lived experience or linguistic descriptions. Those originating from language are often termed “situation models.” On the other hand, models derived from live, interactive experiences are called “experience models.” These are representations of events drawn from perceptual-motor experiences, such as personal interaction with the world, television, film, and virtual reality technologies.

In this paper, we focus on situational models and their implications.

An experience model represents a period with a distinct beginning and end within a given context, which by definition, indicates that spatiotemporal location is a significant organizing factor in memory representations. The spatial location determines where the event unfolds, whether in a physical space like a room or park, or an abstract space like a website or virtual environment. Additionally, the spatial relationships among various entities within the model play a critical role. Some theories suggest omitting spatial relations altogether, proposing that the language simply brings two entities together mentally.

For example, "The boy was next to the tree in the park" indicates not only the park as a location but also establishes a spatial relation between the boy and the tree. This segmentation may lead people to visualize subregions within the larger context.

The viewpoint from which an event is recalled can also evolve post-encoding. Initial recollections are often from the direct perspective of the event, termed "field memory." Over time, descriptions may shift to include oneself, transitioning from a first-person view to a wider perspective. This represents a form of flexible memory, showing that individuals can adopt both field and observer perspectives within their event models.

Temporal information, unlike spatial information, is more often referenced in terms of the action's duration and sequence. Recognition of time breaks indicates the end of one event model and the start of another. Unique events can be linked across time through causal relationships, broadening the scope of an event model.

Entities within an event are central to its processing. Interests revolve around their moods, relationships, goals, and desires, bound within the event model. While many entities are unnamed, category-level identification can be sufficient for understanding structural relationships.

In summary, the interplay of spatial and temporal frameworks, coupled with the roles and identities of entities, shapes our cognitive construction and recall of events, providing a rich landscape for exploring human cognition.
