---
title: 'Understanding the causal links in narratives with a limited memory storage'
date: 2024-01-31
permalink: /posts/2024/01/blog-post-4/
tags:
 - Discourse processing
 - Memory
 - Casual Relationship
---


## Understanding the causal links in narratives with a limited memory storage 

A system with constrained storage capacity must effectively process and understand causal reasoning to ensure successful comprehension. This comprehension can be conceptualized as a problem-solving process wherein the reader is required to discern a series of causal links that bridge the gap between a text's beginning and its conclusion(Trabasso & Sperry, 1985). It is plausible that only the causal antecedent of the subsequent event is retained in short-term memory. By leveraging these connected relationships, one can unearth a causal sequence that navigates from the text's inception to its final resolution. This framework is referred to as the "construction-integration model.(Kintsch & van Dijk,1987.)"

The problem-solving hypothesis posits that individuals recall the textual structure based on its causal framework. To unravel this structure, a parsing algorithm is employed to dissect the text into discrete states. Subsequently, a definition of causal relationships is utilized to determine the interconnections between these states. Conversely, an alternative viewpoint suggests that the meaning of a text is encapsulated in memory as a web of propositions, termed as a "textbase." Innovative strategies are adopted to pinpoint the most pivotal propositions. This selection process commences with the presupposition that the propositions residing in short-term memory are organized into a hierarchical network, with the most significant propositions acting as the superordinate nodes. These superordinate propositions are then chosen for retention in short-term memory.

These two theoretical perspectives diverge on several fronts. Firstly, they are predicated on different units of analysis – clause length states versus propositions. The construction-integration model hypothesizes that two textual elements can be interconnected only if they coexist within the confines of limited-capacity short-term memory. However, literature on problem-solving theory accommodates the possibility of establishing all conceivable connections. Additionally, these models presuppose different mechanisms that contribute to the recallability of a text element, ranging from its causal structure to the duration it persists in short-term memory. A potential unifying approach to harmonize these theories suggests that the causal relationships can be extrapolated to individual levels.

It is arguable that both processes occur concurrently. Beyond retaining causal connections between propositions, one might also strive to maintain a representation of the overarching goals at a situational level, thereby forging links that transcend the immediate context.

A particular study(Fletcher & Bloom, 1988) sought to examine these competing hypotheses by crafting texts that encapsulated various types of causal structures at both the situational and propositional levels. A cohort of students was instructed to internalize the narrative at their own pace and subsequently recount the story's content freely. Diverse models yielded varying forecasts regarding which propositions would be remembered. These model predictions were then juxtaposed with the participants' actual recall performance. The findings corroborated that the status of a causal chain and the quantity of causal relationships are intricately linked to the memorability of text elements, thus substantiating the claims posited by the problem-solving hypothesis. Moreover, the insights gleaned from the results extended to the level of individual propositions, with readers predominantly retaining the terminal propositions from the causal chain in their short-term memory as they perused the text. In essence, the objective of narrative comprehension is to unravel a sequence of causal links that forges a connection from the beginning of the text to its culmination. It is somewhat surprising that goal-oriented information is not consistently held in short-term memory. A plausible explanation is that maintaining active goal information would impose an excessive burden on short-term memory capacity. However, it is conjectured that goals are reinstated whenever local coherence falters.


## References: 
Fletcher, C. R., & Bloom, C. P. (1988). Causal reasoning in the comprehension of simple narrative texts. Journal of Memory and Language, 27(3), 235–244. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(88)90052-6
Kintsch, W., & van Dijk, T. A. 1987.). Toward a Model of Text Comprehension and Production.
Trabasso, T., & Sperry, L. L. (1985). Causal relatedness and importance of story events. Journal of Memory and Language, 24(5), 595–611. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(85)90048-8
