---
title: 'Temporal Receptive Window and Hierarchical Global Updates'
date: 2024-03-17
permalink: /posts/2024/03/blog-post-11/
tags:
- Working Memory
- Working Event Models
---

In everyday scenarios, we accumulate information across different timescales. This involves observing the milliseconds-scale facial expressions of our conversational partners, their body movements on a seconds scale, and tracking their final locations. Only a system capable of allowing past information to influence current processing across multiple timescales simultaneously could handle such diverse information streams.

This challenge is reminiscent of one previously addressed in spatial domains, where individuals can detect crucial edges and local features of images while understanding the concept of money despite variations in the locations of these features.

Parallel to the spatial hierarchy, there is a hierarchy of temporal receptive windows. Processing timescales range from milliseconds in the early visual and auditory cortex, seconds in intermediate areas, to minutes or longer in higher-level association areas such as the posterior medial, lateral temporoparietal, and prefrontal cortex. These timescales have been delineated through observations of activity decay rates following briefly presented stimuli, autocorrelation properties of both stimulus-driven and spontaneous (resting) activity, and examining durations in which past inputs can influence responses to dynamic stimuli.

What brain circuit supports this mechanism? Chaudhuri et al. (2015) constructed a large-scale dynamical model based on an anatomical analysis of connectivity in the macaque neocortex (Markov et al., 2014), describing each cortical area with a threshold-linear, excitatory-inhibitory recurrent network.

When discussing the "integration" of information over time, we broadly refer to the modification of an input signal considering past circuit states. The model by Chaudhuri et al. slows the decay of activity at higher hierarchy levels, representing a specific form of mathematical integration. While this notion of input accumulation aligns with evidence build-up prior to a decision, it prompts us to question whether simply accumulating information over time suffices for functions requiring the amalgamation of prior and current information. Moreover, we must consider the predictive nature of such representations.

Past and present inputs might interact more complexly than simple summation. For instance, the interpretation and neural responses to "she carefully closed all of the windows" can vary significantly based on preceding context, highlighting the necessity for circuit capabilities beyond mere signal summation. Active traces of past information within each circuit modify online processing, suggesting a need for new biophysical circuit models enabling complex integration of recent memory with continuous input.

Previously, the integration of information across timescales has been conceptualized as working memory. This concept extends to how prior information shapes language comprehension, with phonemes, words, sentences, and discourses contributing to understanding based on accumulated information across timescales.

By introducing the term "working event models," we suggest a separation between storing and processing various information types. Contemporary theories of visual working memory, for example, locate visual memory representations within the visual processing stream itself, yet functionally separate from new visual input due to top-down fronto-parietal signals.

A more pertinent question may be how prior information continuously shapes current processing rather than the interaction of different memory systems. The separation of memory content from ongoing information processing has been challenged by models proposing no dedicated memory systems, with memory being an integral part of neural networks. This shifts the focus towards the "memory of systems" and the hierarchical organization of systemic memory.

Recent inquiries into the separation between memory and processing units by neuroscientists suggest local interactions between memory and perception. This perspective is further supported by the involvement of the medial temporal lobe memory system in perceptual processes, emphasizing individual differences in language comprehension and mnemonic performance based on linguistic expertise and domain-specific knowledge.

Thus, discussing the processing of dynamic information, such as a book or stream of text, necessitates revisiting these concepts. Incremental updates within each hierarchical level may be crucial for coherence, challenging strictly predictive and hierarchical systems.

To address the current limitations of separating stored previous information from the online processing of current information, we propose the concept of "process memory." This concept focuses on active traces of past information used by a neural circuit to process incoming information, highlighting the importance of updating event models based on prior context. This distinguishes our proposal from existing concepts, emphasizing the integration of information with past context rather than mere update concerns.
